# Overview
LLM training is a high compute and memory intensive operation, and so optimizing this process for efficiency is key to get massive savings in GPU hours. This document outlines the end ot end training LLM lifecycle and key hardware-aware optimizations you can make in the code to scale training efficiently.

We use a copy of Open AI's 124M paramaeter GPT-2 implementation as a case study to walk through the general training pipeline and optimizations below. The basic model implementation using PyTorch starts at around 1000 ms per training round and 163K tokens per second, but by the end, Karpathy reaches 1.5M tokens per second - a massive efficiency gain!

# Early Optimizations
Here are the optimizations demonstrated in the case study:
* **Mixed precision use of floating point numbers (precision trade-offs):** Knowing that the transformer architecture holds information in floating point numbers and does large scale matrix multiplications, the number of bits or decimal points in your floating point numbers can make a big difference in computation efficiency. In GPT-2, they use 16-bit floats instead of 32-bit floats at some parts of the pipeline, which lowers precision, but speeds up computation. This reduces the memory required since you're using half the bits. When you use 16 vs 32 bits is strategic, balancing when precision is required and when compute is more important. 
* **Kernel fusion using torch.compile** Kernels are sets of math instructions given to the tensor cores to run. In the forward pass, there are several points of math oeprations that you need to do. For each instance, the GPU must write the output to memory, and then read it back again to use for the next operation. This process of writing and then reading is time intensive, so by using torch.compile, you can fuse these operations together into a single kernel so you only write/read once at the end instead of multiple times aka **kernel fusion**.
* **Flash attention to optimize memory bandwidth (memory wall):** As mentioned in bullet prior, reading and writing inputs and outputs, is a major source of time waste. Specifically, for many calculations, the GPU reads and writes outputs to and from the High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) since it itself does not have enough memory to support the calculations. You can optimize this using an algorithm called **flash attention** which strategically architects how to use memory for time savings - specifically it combines matrix multiplication and softmax operations to occur in parallel, which minimizes memory reads and writes. A key idea in LLM training compute / memory cost is that a lot of the expense can come from moving data around the infrastructure, not the calculations themselves.

# Further Optimizations
* **Math optimizations - avoid ugly numbers!** Since the LLM requires a lot of math calculations, it's very helpful to ensure the numbers you use work well together. In GPT-2, they use 50,305 as the vocab size instead of 50,257. Although this adds some 'fake' tokens at the end of the vocab, it nets out being faster since 50,305 is divisible by 2, which simplifies the math calculations throughout.
* **Run multiple GPUs at once:** This is one of the biggest optimization levers. Running LLM training requires massive GPU compute, so distributing the training pipeline across multiple GPUs earns you significant time savings. Using multiple GPUs requires some re-configuration of the code to basically tell it to process different parts of the tensor input on different GPUs. One key note here is that using multiple GPUs means you need to wait for each to finish before you can aggregate adn apply its results to the neurons or weights.
* **Gradient accumulation and batch sizes:** Gradient accumulation let's you essentially break down the data you're processing (B x T) into smaller batches which your hardware can handle. GPT-2 training processed 0.5M tokens per training step, which is phsyically impossible to run on any modern GPU - a GPU can't hold 0.5M tokens in memory at once. Instead, you run the optimizer on the data in small batches, calculate the gradients for each batch, and wait to apply the gradient updates to the neurons until all chunks of data are processed. Once every gradient calculation pass is complete, you average all the resulting gradients weights and then apply them to the neurons. While the T value is fixed at the initial architecture design step, you can udpate B according to the hardware you have available. Using real numbers to demonstrate this: 
  * If you want to process 0.5M tokens per training step and assuming you have 8 GPUs, each which can process ~4k tokens each, you can calculate the tokens per "data chunk" and calculate how many gradient accumulation steps are required: 
    * T = 1024 tokens
    * B = 4 per GPU
    * GPUs available = 8
    * Tokens per each "chunk" forward pass = 4 x 1024 x 8 = 32,768 tokens
    * Gradient accumulation steps = 0.5M / 32,768 = ~15.26 steps, aka "mini batches". Since you can't do a fraction of a step, you'd round up to 16 steps to ensure you hit the target of 0.5M tokens per training step.  
* **Data pipeline optimizations:** Pre-tokenizing the entire input training data set is another key optimization to make. Additionally, you want to batch the data set in chunks, known as **shards**, and distribute the shards for processing across the GPUs. You need to implement code to handle this piping, and ensure the GPUs aren't reading and training on the same data.

# Unrelated to Optimizations but Critical to Training - Evals 
Lastly, at the end of an optimized training is making sure the trained LLM is actually working well, which can be done through evaluations. 

* **HellaSwag Score** is an industry standard evaluation method of evaluating your model's quality - today this serves as a baseline / sanity check since there are many more sophisticated evaluations available. It's an evaluation designed to test the model's logic and reasoning by asking it to select the most logical completion to an everyday scenario.
* **Validation Loss** similarly measures the model's quality by comparing its predictions to a held back portion of the training dataset it has never seen before. Similar to HellaSwag, you're evaluating how well the model is generating coherent text, not just parroting the training set it saw. 

You might assume that if validation loss is going down, your HellaSwag score would also go down but this is not automatically the case. For instance, your model may be very good at predicing punctuations or common words like "and" and "the" - these will lower the loss significantly - but it may not be very good at generating logical, coherent text. This is why it's important to use multiple evaluation metrics to evaluate the model. 
